X. E XPERIMENT R ESULTS
A. Implementation Details
We implement the proposed system fully in C++ and
CUDA. The tracking and mapping modules run in parallel
and communicate via ROS, with the mapping built upon
the LibTorch framework. The depth completion network SP-
Net [110] is deployed with TensorRT for efficient inference.
For odometry, we reuse the ikd-Tree parameters from FAST-
LIO2 [99], set the camera pose optimization step N t in
Sec. VI-B4 to 30. For mapping data preparation, we set N p in
Sec. VII-A to 10 (Avia, Mid-360), 5 (OS1-64), and 1 (VLP-
32C). ϵ 1 and ϵ 2 in Sec. VII-B are set to 0.1 m and 50 m,
respectively. For map expansion, we set τ in Sec. VIII-A2 to
0.99. As for map optimization, we set the loss weighting λ to
0.2 and ξ to 0.005, and the number K of selected keyframes
to 100. All the learning rates for Gaussian attributes follow
vanilla [2] but do not decay with schedulers. We keep the same
hyperparameters in all sequences with the same sensor setup
to ensure a fair and comprehensive evaluation. Experiments
are run on a desktop PC with an NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU
(24 GB VRAM), Intel i9-13900KF CPU, and 64 GB RAM.
B. Baselines
This paper focuses on developing an elaborated radiance-
filed-based SLAM system capable of robust and accurate pose
estimation while constructing fine-grained photo-realistic 3D
maps in real time. Therefore, our comparative analysis specif-
ically targets authentic SLAM systems, explicitly excluding
pure mapping systems that require a priori ground-truth poses.
We first evaluate localization performance against state-
of-the-art traditional LiDAR-Inertial-Camera SLAM systems,
including optimization-based LVI-SAM [28] and filter-based
R3LIVE [30] and FAST-LIVO2 [33]. We also include two
neural SLAM methods: PIN-SLAM [94], a neural LiDAR
SLAM approach utilizing point-based NeRF for geometry-
only reconstruction, and DBA-Fusion [118], which integrates
IMU data into DROID-SLAM [43], currently the most ad-
vanced neural visual SLAM framework. We run PIN-SLAM
by feeding in undistorted LiDAR point clouds.
Furthermore, to evaluate both the localization and photo-
realistic mapping performances of the entire system, we
compare against photo-realistic radiance-field-based SLAM,
including both NeRF-based and 3DGS-based. 1) NeRF-based:
As no related LiDAR-Camera system is publicly available,
we adapt the state-of-the-art RGB-D NeRF-based method Co-
SLAM [13] with pseudo RGB-D input by merging LiDAR
scans. When rendering the full image, we use SPNet [110] to
complete the LiDAR depth maps for depth-guided sampling.
2) 3DGS-based: We compare with the state-of-the-art RGB-
only method MonoGS [18], which elegantly derives pose
gradients. Given the scarcity of available LiDAR-Camera
3DGS-based methods, we run the state-of-the-art RGB-D
3DGS-based approach SplaTAM [16] using pseudo RGB-
D images. We also compare against the RGB-D inertial
method, MM3DGS-SLAM [20], which extends SplaTAM by
incorporating IMU data, and include a comparison with the
LiDAR-Inertial-Camera Gaussian Splatting SLAM framework
Gaussian-LIC [21], where the sky modeling is disabled to
facilitate depth rendering. For fair comparison, all methods
are evaluated without loop closure and post-processing.

D. Experiment-2: Evaluation of Mapping
1) Evaluation Protocols: We assess the performance of
photo-realistic mapping by evaluating the quality of rendered
images generated from the Gaussian map. To this end, we
adopt several widely used metrics, including Peak Signal-
to-Noise Ratio (PSNR), Structural Similarity Index (SSIM),
and Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS)[2].
Consistent with MonoGS and SplaTAM, we use AlexNet[119]
as the backbone network for LPIPS evaluation. When ground-
truth depth maps are available, we also evaluate geometric
accuracy using Depth-L1 error computed over valid depth
regions. It should be noted that we adopt Ours-1 in the
mapping evaluation and the following experiments.
Many existing methods [23, 24, 37] report rendering per-
formance at their respective training views. However, such
evaluations may be biased due to overfitting and do not reliably
reflect the quality of photo-realistic mapping, particularly at
novel views. To ensure a comprehensive and fair evaluation,
we assess rendering quality on both in-sequence and out-of-
sequence novel views, explicitly excluding training views.
In our evaluations, all compared methods are constrained
to use the same training views, selected using the keyframing
strategy described in Sec. VII-A, while the remaining non-
keyframes are used for evaluating in-sequence novel view
rendering. To eliminate the influence of pose estimation errors
on mapping performance, all methods are provided with our
estimated poses for evaluation on public datasets. For our self-
collected dataset where ground-truth poses are available, both
our method and the baselines use ground-truth poses to avoid
trajectory alignment errors, which could significantly affect the
evaluation of out-of-sequence novel view rendering.
2) In-Sequence Novel View Synthesis: Tab. III and Tab. IV
show quantitative evaluation of the rendering results of in-
sequence novel views across both the pulic datasets and our
self-collected dataset. Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 present the novel
view renderings of both RGB and depth in sequence. The
RGB-only method MonoGS initializes Gaussians at a preset
constant depth with random noise and subsequently inserts
new Gaussians based on the rendered depth statistics. In
small-scale indoor scenarios, the optimization of the inserted
Gaussians may gradually converge. However, it becomes much
more challenging in larger scenes, where more and more
Gaussians with incorrect positions accumulate, resulting in nu-
merous floaters and poor visual quality. Incorporating LiDARs
with accurate geometric priors can substantially alleviate this
problem. For example, Co-SLAM leverages the LiDAR depth
for ray sampling and supervision of the neural implicit map
optimization, and its rendered results show relatively clear
structures. It is capable of rendering beyond the LiDAR FoV
based on the optimized neural representation, as shown in
Fig. 7 and Fig. 8. However, the renderings of Co-SLAM appear
noisy with severe artifacts, even though we specially utilize
completed depth maps to guide the sampling during full-image
rendering. In contrast, the LiDAR-incorporated 3DGS-based
methods MM3DGS-SLAM and Gaussian-LIC exhibit better
rendering performance. They reliably initialize Gaussians from
precise LiDAR points. Nonetheless, MM3DGS-SLAM repre-
sents the scene as isotropic and view-independent Gaussians to
improve running speed, but unfortunately still fails to achieve
real-time performance while sacrificing the visual quality.
Note that MM3DGS-SLAM uses around three times as many
Gaussians as our method to model the scene. Gaussian-LIC
underutilizes precise LiDAR depth and ignores to optimize
the geometric quality of the Gaussian map, leading to poor-
quality rendered depth. In addition, both methods struggle to
accurately reconstruct areas unobserved by the LiDAR.
Our method attains the best in-sequence novel view ren-
dering performance, both quantitatively and qualitatively. The
system renders sharper RGB images with fewer artifacts at
novel views, beyond only overfitting to the training views. It
successfully reconstructs regions never scanned by the LiDAR,
such as the ceiling beyond the reach of the VLP-32C, as
demonstrated in the last row of Fig. 7. Moreover, despite
relying on sparse LiDAR depth, our method is able to produce
high-quality depth maps across different LiDAR modalities.
It is worth noting that severe rolling shutter distortion in
the images of the M2DGR dataset affects the quality of the
rendered depth, as illustrated in the last row of Fig. 8.
3) Out-of-Sequence Novel View Synthesis: We further
evaluate out-of-sequence novel view rendering on our self-
collected dataset, which presents a greater challenge than in-
sequence rendering. For this assessment, views are sampled
at 10 Hz along the out-of-sequence trajectory. As shown in
Tab. IV, our method achieves the best results. Fig. 9 illustrates
the camera trajectories and the corresponding novel view
rendering results along the out-of-sequence path. Compared
to our closest baseline, Gaussian-LIC, our Gaussian map is
more effectively regularized and optimized, leading to sharper
and higher-fidelity novel view synthesis with fewer artifacts.